DATA CAN BE ACCESSED VIA:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/geo2r/?acc=GSE61113

All raw data is accessable trough either opening the .CEL files with third party software (I believe R is also possible). However, often a .CDF file is required
in order to open a .CEL file. A .CDF file describes the layout for an Affymetrix GeneChip array, and for this research comes
under the name: "[HuGene-2_0-st] Affymetrix Human Gene 2.0 ST Array [transcript (gene) version]". On the affymetrix website the libraries can be downloaded,
but I am unsure that this will eventually lead to the neccessary file, since only data files and an executable file can be
downloaded. However, I am unable to correctly install this library. The .CDF file data is visible in a visualized data table, however the data file
is not provided. The sample files also show no correlation with the GSM numbers of the raw/processed data

The processed data per dataset is also accessable on "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE61113".
Here the samples are divided in 9 different categories:
1. AT57 TCP
2. AT57 PI flat
3. AT57 PI 650
4. AT58 TCP
5. AT58 PI flat
6. AT58 PI 650
7. AT61 TCP
8. AT61 PI flat
9. AT61 PI 650

The numbers 57, 58 and 61 are the donor numbers. These are the donor MSCs. TCP, PI flat and PI 650 say something about
the chip that was used. [TCP] = Tissue cultured plastic, [PI flat]= non-structured polyimide and [PI 650]= nanogrooved polyimide.
The data in the samples are the genome wide gene expression profiles of MSCs after 5 days under normal conditions.

When the data is accessed trough the visualized full table. The data from the "HuGene 2.0 st" platform and the samples
show a correlation. The ID_REF of the samples are the same as the ID of the chip data (transcript_cluster_id). So the "VALUE"(= log2 RMA signal)
of the samples can be compared to the data of the chip. This chip data includes: strand range, start range, end range, number of probes,
GenBank and RefSeq Accessions from mrna_assignment column, genomic location of transcript cluster and NCBI RefSeq for chromosome of current build.

The RMA (Robust Microarray Analysis) signal is a form of quantile normalization applicable to gene expression (microarray) experiments. 
It is a analysis method that when selected, adjusts the probe intensity data in three stepts:
1. Signal values for each chip are adjusted using RMA background correction
2. Data across all chips are normalized using the selected normalization method:
  - Quantile
  - Global Median
  - None
3. Probe data are summarized into gene level signal values using RMA's median polish summarization
(https://www.dnastar.com/ArrayStar_Help/index.html#!Documents/rma.htm) 
The log 2, I assume, is an extra method of processing the data. A tutorial on RMA can be found here:
"https://genomequebec.mcgill.ca/nanuqAdministration/download/MicroarrayRMATutorial_en.pdf"

When searching for the ID numbers, somtimes another NCBI platform can be found, describing extra information about the HuGene 2-0 st Affymetrix Human Gene 2.0 ST Array.
The GB_ACC (GenBank RefSeq Accessions) is more promising, and searching for the codes results in a ncbi database about
what RNA the code is linked to (e.g. NR_046018 = Homo Sapiens DEAD/H-box Helicase 11 like 1, (DDX11L1), non coding.
When comparing the two datasets, the RMA signal can be linked to a specific RNA.

I found that via an online tool called GEO2R the data can 
also be accessed, by replicating the R file online. By using the R script given in the online tool, the data can also be accessed via R, because the data is 
linked to the online platform and can be accessed with the code "GSE61113". However, it is currently not clear what the data in the dataset means.
The GEO2R data seems to link the two databases together, providing the GSM (with title AT57 TCP), the title and value together,
and links it to the corresponding RNA. When clicking on a row, a graph is shown with the expression values per GSM code. Some other data is shown as well,
such as P-values and t-statistics).
(link: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/geo2r/?acc=GSE61113)


Summary of paper "Surface topography enhances differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells towards osteogenic and adipogenic lineages" (Abagnale, et al., 2015)

In this study, in vitro mesenchymal stem cell (MSCs) differentiation was compared on a variety of groove/ridge structures.
Different nano- and micro-patterns were generated in polyimide using reactive ion etching or multi beam laser interference.
The structures affected cell spreading and orientation of human MSCs, which was also reflected in focal adhesions morphology and size.
Migration happened parallel to the nano-patterns. Surface patterns clearly enhance differentiation of MSCs towards specific lineages:
15 micrometer ridged increased adipogenic differentiation whereas 2 micrometer ridged enhanced osteogenic differentiation.
Nano-patterns with a perodicity of 650 nm increased differentiation in both osteogenic and adipogenic lineages. 
In absence of differentiation media surfuce structure did neither induce differentiation, nor lineage-specific gene expression changes.
Results provide insight on how structuring of tailored implant interfaces do not induce differentiation per se, but support directed differentiation.

Cells can sense substrate elasticity, mechanical stimuli from the ECM, cell-to-cell interactions and also surface patterns
ranging from 10 nanometer to 100 micrometer. This recognition is mostly mediated by integrin receptors. Tailored biomaterials
can mimic the topography of the "stem cell niche", but those landscapes are very complex. The topography is therefore changed
and tested with one paramater at a time in order to determine its impact on cellular functions. Grooved patterns are chosen because
1. width of grooves and ridged can be systematically modified
2. orientation of cells allong these structures can readily be observed
3. Such structures may reflect the fibrillar organization of ECM of callagen fibrils

Methods of engraving depends on the biomaterial and on the pattern. Frequently used methods are:
- Photolithography
- Soft lithography
- Reactive ion etching
- Direct multi-beam interference

MSCs are populair cell types because of their relevance in regenitive medicine, can be isolated from various tissues,
and they can differentiate towards multiple cell types including osteocytes, adipocytes, and chrondrocytes. It has been
suggested that specific surface patterns can either maintain MSCs in undifferentiated state or drive them towards one of 
the above lineages. Cell shape, cytoskeletal tension and RhoA siganling are thought to direct this commitment.

Several studies focused on the impact of micro- and nano-grooved substrates in osteogenic differentiation:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0142961213013902
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S014296121200066X
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0142961211011343
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0142961210000505
https://www.nature.com/articles/nmat2013  

The following studies reported effects on adipogenesis:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0142961213007151
https://www.scopus.com/record/display.uri?eid=2-s2.0-2142652189&origin=inward&txGid=bcd2bcbaa47837328c29da252f6c22bb


THE STUDY:

In this study a microgrooved polymide chip featuring a combination of 25 different strucutes with systematic variation of the width
of grooves and ridges was designed. In addition, groove and ridge structures where created by multi beam laser inteference.
These two different approaches were combined to bridge a wider spectrum of topographies. The impact of these structures on morphology,
focal adhesions and in vitro differentiation of MSCs was analysed.

engraving and production methods described in paper, as well as isolation of MSCs.

Analysis:

- Proliferation: Proliferation of MSCs on the different substrates was estimated by the number on nuclei. MSCs were fixed and stained
after 10h and 1 week time. Pictures were taken from random areas using a fluorescent microscope and the nuclei were counted with software.

- Focal edhesion Analysis: were detected as bright clusters in immunocytochemical analysis with the use of images.

- Adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation: After 2 weeks samples were fixed and stained with DAPI and the fluorescent dye BODIPY.
The percentage of differentiated cells was determined in pictures of randomly chosen areas using a fluorescent microscope and counted.
After 2 weeks of differentiation, osteogenesis was quantified by being stained with alizarin red dye and extracted and quantified.

-qRT-PCR analysis: RNA was isolated from samples and analyzed. cDNA was generated with a kit. Semi-quantative qRT-PCR was carried out with
a special instrument with gene specific assays. GAPDH was used as reference gene.

- Cell motility analysis: not relevant

- Microarray analysis: Genome wide gene expression profiles of MSCs were analyzed after five days of culture on nanostructed substrates
Total RNA (300 ng) was amplified and hybridized. Raw data were normalized. For principle component analysis the entire gene set without X and Y
chromoses were used. Hierarchical clustering was perfomed. To identify sgnificantly differentially expressed genes a paired limma T-test was done in R.
Since none of the genes reached an adjusted p-value of <0.05, an alternative filter for 2-fold differentially expressed genes was done. 
Microarray data is accessible in GEO: "http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo" with accession number: GSE61113.

- Statistics: Results are expressed as mean +- SD of at least three independent experiments if not indicated otherwise. Two-sided Student's T-test to
estimate statistical relevance was used.

RESULTS:

- Grooves and ridges: On the chip the width and grooves varied ranging from 2 to 15 micrometer. 25 different patterns as well as flat,
non-structed PI could be analyzed in parallel. The groove depth was about 2 micrometer. MSCs aligned parallel to the main axis of the grooves
on all 25 differnt patterns within a few hours whereas they randomply spread on a flat surface. All the squares supported
MSCs grwoth and no consistend differences in cellular proliferation was onbserved in five biologica replicas. MSCs seem to proliferate equally well
on the different microstructes. However, line and space patterns to affect cellular orienatation. 

- Impact on differentiation of MSCs: for adiopogenisis, the differentiation into fat cells, the percentage of cells that acquired fat droplets.
On the 15 micrometer ridges MSCs revealed higher adipogenic differentiation than on 2 micrometer ridges.
For osteogenesis an oposite trend was found. It was enhanced on thinner ridges (2 micrometer!). There was a gradual reduction of
osteogenic differentiation with increasing ridge width, whereas groove width was less relevant. Thus the size of the ridges is more
important than the size of the grooves to support lineage specific differentiation of MSCs (!!!).

Increased expression of the osteogenic marker genes osteonectin (SPARC), osteopontin (SPP1) and osteocalcin (BGLAP) was
NOT observed in the thinner ridges, which might be attributed to the fact that up-regulation of osteogenic marker genes was always relatively low.

Cells on the microgrooves were more elongated than on flat PI and the aspect ratio was particularly high on the smaller 2 micrometer grooves.

SAME EXPERIMENT IN VITRO:
Osteogenic differentiation was significantly enhanced by PI 650. Furthermore, up-regulation of the osteogenic marker genes was higher on
nanostructured PI than on flat PI. Adipogenesis as well as osteogenesis can be enhanced by the same nanostructures indicating
that the support of nanotopography on in vitro differentiation is not necessarily lineage-specific.

NANOTOPOGRAPHY DOES NOT AFFECT LINEAGE-SPECIFIC GENE EXPRESSION:
The hypothesis that nanosctructures might drive cellular differentiation even in the absence of specific induction media was made. 
Global gene expression profiles of MSCs cultured in normal medium either on tissue culture plastic, non strucuted PI or PI650, was analyzed.
Component analysis shows that samples were seperated according to the substrate in which they had been cultured. 
Samples clustered primarily according to the MSC preparations from different donors. The search for genes that were significantly differentially
expressed on the different substrates, none reached statistical significance. This might be the result of high donor-specific variation and
a small number of replicas. Thereforce they focused alternatively on genes which showed two-fold expression changes.
A high proportion of these differentailly expressed transcripts were non coding RNAs. For further analyzation if 
nanostructured biased lineage-specific gene expression in the absence of medium gene sets were compiled involved in
osteogenic, adipogenic, chondrogenic and myogenic differentiation. However, these gene sets did not reveal consistent changes
according to the substrates.

Numerous reports show that surface patterning influences gene expression profiles:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S014296121200066X
https://www.scopus.com/record/display.uri?eid=2-s2.0-36749093527&origin=inward&txGid=67f2d2a2d37074a9304b8e8101ce59b4
https://www.scopus.com/record/display.uri?eid=2-s2.0-47649092532&origin=inward&txGid=e5af9df54613866e08706099ef0577f3

However, when they compared the transcriptome of MSCs cultured on non-structured PI and PI650 they did not detect significant differences
in gene expression using adjusted p-values. 
